Windows Installer Upgrade blog (#3620)
jenkins-infra/jenkins.io: content/blog/2020/08/2020-08-12-windows-installers-upgrade.adoc

---
layout: post
title: "Windows Installer Upgrades"
tags:
- windows
- platform-sig
- installers
author: vsilverman
---

The purpose of the current guide is to describe the transition from the old Jenkins Windows installer 2.235.2 (32 bit) to the new Jenkins Windows installer 2.235.3 (64 bit)

Let's take a look how Jenkins installation on Windows happened before release of this upgrade.

## Step 1

image:/images/post-images/2020-08-07-win-installers-upgrade/old_installer_1.png[Installer Startup, role=center]

It's evident that branding information is not present here.

## Step 2

image:/images/post-images/2020-08-07-win-installers-upgrade/old_installer_2.png[Installation Directory, role=center]

Not much branding information here as well.

## Step 3

image:/images/post-images/2020-08-07-win-installers-upgrade/old_installer_3.png[Install It, role=center]

> The previos installer gave only one option for installing Jenkins - just selecting the destination folder.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The previous installer gave only one option for installing Jenkins - just selecting the destination folder.

```

## Issues

The current installer has a few issues that the Platform SIG wanted to fix in a new install experience for users.

 1. The installer only supports 32-bit installations.
 2. The user could not select ports or user accounts to run the service on.
 3. The installer bundled a 32-bit version of the Java runtime instead of using a pre-existing JRE

>  4. The installer did not support the experimental support in Jenkins for Java 11

Reviewer: Jenkins supports Java 11 officially.  Support is no longer "experimental"
```suggestion
 4. The installer did not support Java 11

```

 5. The JENKINS_HOME directory was not placed in a good spot for modern Windows
 6. There is no branding in the installer.
 
## Road Forward

> The experimental Jenkins Windows Installer resolves most of the outlined issues!

Reviewer: Installer was experimental in Feb 2019.  Is production now.  Has been used in weekly builds since April 2020.
```suggestion
The new Jenkins Windows Installer resolves most of the outlined issues!

```

 1. The new installer will only support 64-bit systems going forward. This is the vast majority of Windows systems these days, so this will help more users install Jenkins using the installer package.
 2. The user is now able to enter user information for the service and select the port that Jenkins will use and verify availability of the port.
 3. The installer no longer bundles a JRE, but will search for a compatible JRE on the system. If the user wants to use a different JRE, it may be specified during install.

>  4. The installer has support for running with a Java 11 JRE, including the components listed on the link:/blog/2018/12/14/java11-preview-availability/[Java 11 Preview Page].

Reviewer: No need to refer to two year old preview information
```suggestion
 4. The installer supports Java 11.

```

Now the installer allows both specifying and testing your credentials by validating that the account has LogonAsService rights.

### Step 4

image:/images/post-images/2020-08-07-win-installers-upgrade/new_installer_4.png[Port Selection, role=center]

Now the installer also allows specifying the port that Jenkins should run on and will not continue until a valid port is entered and tested.

### Step 5

image:/images/post-images/2020-08-07-win-installers-upgrade/new_installer_5.png[JRE Selection, role=center]

Now instead of bundling a JRE, the installer searches for a compatible JRE on the system (in the current search no JRE was installed). In case you would like to use a different JRE from the one found by the installer, you can browse and specify it. Only JRE 8 and JRE 11 runtimes are supported. In case the selected JRE is found to be version 11 the installer will
automatically add the necessary arguments and additional jar files for running under Java 11.

### Step 6

image:/images/post-images/2020-08-07-win-installers-upgrade/new_installer_6.png[Install It, role=center]

> All of the items that users can enter in the installer should be overridable on the command line for automated deployment as well. The full list of properties that can be overridden will be available soon.

Reviewer: That's a nice capability that I didn't realize was available.  @slide , is there a list of command line arguments that should be described?
```suggestion
All of the items that users can enter in the installer should be overridable on the command line for automated deployment as well. The full list of properties that can be overridden will be available soon.

```

Reviewer 2: It would be nice to describe it. I can try to pull something together.

## Next Steps

> 
> Currently the members of the Platform SIG are reviewing the new installer, but we need people to test the installer and give a feedback. If you are interested in testing the new installer, please join the link:https://gitter.im/jenkinsci/platform-sig[Platform SIG gitter room] for more information.
> 
> There are still some things that are being researched and implemented in the new installer (e.g., keeping port and other selections when doing an upgrade), but it is getting close to release.
> 
> In addition to updates to the MSI based Windows installer, the Platform SIG is working on taking over the link:https://chocolatey.org/packages/jenkins[Chocolatey Jenkins package] and releasing a version for each update.

Reviewer: We could offer users choices as they consider their upgrade path
```suggestion
Windows users have alternatives for their existing Jenkins installations:

Upgrade from inside Jenkins::
The "Manage Jenkins" section of the running Jenkins will continue to include an "Upgrade" button for Windows users.
You may continue to use that "Upgrade" button to update the Jenkins installation on your Windows computer.
Upgrade from inside Jenkins will continue to use the current Java version.
Upgrade from inside Jenkins will continue to use the current installation location.

Upgrade with the new Jenkins MSI installer:
If you run the new Jenkins MSI installer on your Jenkins that was installed with the old Jenkins MSI installer, it will ... fill in the blanks ...
After the new Jenkins MSI installer has run, the "Manage Jenkins" section of the running Jenkins will continue to include an "Upgrade" button for Windows users.
You may continue to use that "Upgrade" button to update the Jenkins installation on your Windows computer.
Upgrade from inside Jenkins will continue to use the Java version selected when the new Jenkins MSI installer ran.
Upgrade from inside Jenkins will continue to use the new installation location.

```

---
layout: post
title: "Windows Installer Upgrades"
tags:
- windows
- platform-sig
- installers
author: vsilverman
---

> The purpose of the current guide is to describe the transition from the old Jenkins Windows installer 2.235.2 (32 bit) to the new Jenkins Windows installer 2.235.3 (64 bit)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This article describes the transition from the old Jenkins Windows installer 2.235.2 (32 bit) to the new Jenkins Windows installer 2.235.3 (64 bit)

```

---
layout: post
title: "Windows Installer Upgrades"
tags:
- windows
- platform-sig

> - installers

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- installers
- announcement
```
